The Milan Cortina 2026 Winter Olympics
represents a new era in hosting the
games. It's the first Olympics
officially hosted by two cities. This is
quite a change. It's always been one
city per Olympics. This is particularly
interesting because the city of Cortina
Dempzo has hosted the Olympic Games Solo
before back in 1956. The two cities are
also quite far apart, over 400 km, and
events will be held in four clusters
throughout the Italian Alps. The closing
ceremony will actually be held in a
third city, Verona, in a Roman coliseum
built in 30 AD. Why did the
International Olympic Committee allow
this and why now? Well, simply put,
there wasn't much interest in hosting
the 2026 Olympics. In the end, only two
bids materialized, Stockholm A and Milan
Cortina. But this wasn't always the
case. Historically, it was common to see
four to five serious bids in the final
vote, often representing at least three
continents. In 1998, Nagago beat out
four other bids. Salt Lake City beat out
three others. But by 2017, it was clear
that cities were no longer interested in
hosting the Olympics. We'll get to why
that is later in the video. But the IOC
saw fewer and fewer bids with more
cities withdrawing bids late in the
process. In response, the IOC changed
the bidding process. First, they eased
up on the rules for bidding, including
the one city rule. Now, multiple cities,
entire regions, or even countries can
bid on the games. The host city contract
is now simply called the host contract.
Second, the IOC now plays a more active
role in shephering bids through the
process. They work with interested
candidates earlier and even admit that
future host decisions may not even be a
vote between two cities, but the IOC
simply affirming the most promising
candidate that made it through the host
selection process. This actually
occurred for the bidding of the 2030
Winter Olympics. There was no
competitive vote at the end. Only one
bid made it through the process, though
there were three other interested
cities. And the winning bid wasn't for a
city or pair of cities. It was for an
entire region. French Alps 2030. The
games will be hosted in four clusters,
including one in Nice on the
Mediterranean. The trend continues in
2034. The winter games will be back in
Salt Lake City, but it's officially
called Utah 2034, not Salt Lake City
2034. This acknowledges that it's the
entire state hosting, not one city. Is
this change good for the Olympics and
good for cities? Let's talk about why
we're seeing this change and what it
means for cities after the bike bell.
[bell]
The Olympics are bigger than ever these
days with more events and more venues.
This is a huge reason why it's
increasingly difficult for a single city
to host. Now, some of the additional
events may not add much to the overall
burden of hosting. For example, the
mixed 4x100 meter relay event where two
men and two women compete was added in
the 2020 Tokyo Games. It didn't require
an additional venue or even new
athletes. But the historical trend does
show that the games are getting bigger.
Now a summer Olympics host city must
have facilities to host such diverse
activities as horseback riding, an
entire soccer tournament, canoe slalom,
golf, surfing, BMX racing, and sport
climbing. Many of these were added in
the last 20 years. Now, obviously, host
cities have bent the rules, so to speak,
to make all of these events work. Paris
had soccer games in other French cities
and hosted surfing in Tahiti, an island
in French Polynesia. But as more and
more events get added, the reality is
clear. No one city can reasonably host
all the events. Winter Olympic host
cities have fewer total events to deal
with, but more specialized venues.
Bobsled is one of the most exciting
Winter Olympic sports. And when you
watch it, you kind of assume that there
must be a ton of people doing this to
make it an Olympic sport. But the
reality is that there are only 17 total
tracks currently in operation around the
world. This is a highly specialized
venue and the last eight were all
constructed because the city was hosting
a winter games and needed the venue.
This includes the Milan Cortina
Olympics. Cortina had a course from
their previous Olympics, but it didn't
meet modern standards and it had to be
completely rebuilt. There were concerns
that they wouldn't finish it in time and
that the sliding events would have to be
hosted in Lake Placid, New York. This
specialization of venues is why several
years ago I made a video suggesting that
the Olympics establish six host cities
on six continents. Three summer hosts
and three winter hosts. They would just
rotate the games between those
locations. That way host cities wouldn't
have to build brand new sliding courses
every single games. But they didn't take
my suggestion. The Olympic Games are
more than just the venues though. Hosts
have to house all the athletes, coaches,
trainers, officials, judges, media, and
security personnel. The 1988 Soul Games
had over 8,000 athletes competing, but
every summer games since Atlanta has had
over 10,000 compete. Team staff
entouragees have increased, too. Olympic
villages have to be large enough to host
everyone. The Paris Olympic Village
featured 4,000 rooms that housed 14,500
athletes and staff. There wasn't a site
within Paris proper to build that much
housing, so it was built on a former
industrial site in a nearby suburb. So,
you get the idea. I'm not even getting
to the media centers that broadcast
partners build out, but they are
extensive. Host cities must also have
tens of thousands of hotel rooms
available for further staff and Olympics
attendees. It's a big big event that
only lasts for 2 weeks, followed by the
Parolympic Games. With all of these
venues comes cost. Olympics can cost
billions and billions of dollars. The
2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi were the
most expensive games ever, costing $51
billion. That's a bit of an outlier,
though, as most recent games cost half
that or less. The costs specifically
incurred by local city governments and
their taxpayers are harder to ascertain.
All hosts hope to break even or even
make money on the games, but the revenue
formulas are all different. The first
profitable modern Olympics were Sievo
and Los Angeles, both in 1984. LA used
existing facilities to keep costs down
and were savvy about using sponsorships.
The games made 250 million on an
investment of 413 million. Taxpayers
kicked in75 million which by Olympic
standards is pretty low. LA hopes to
make a profit on the games again using a
similar strategy. The thing is the LA
1984 success actually might have been a
curse as other cities believe they could
recreate the profits and prestige of
those games. But instead there have been
some notable misses. The Athens 2004
games cost $9 billion to put on and over
6 billion came from public funds.
Vancouver's Olympics cost taxpayers 2.3
billion and the Rio games cost taxpayers
11.6 6 billion. Cost overruns are also a
big risk associated with hosting. Tokyo
went billions over budget, though no
doubt due in part to shifting the games
a year due to co, but it's fairly common
for budgets to soar past estimates. And
sometimes taxpayers can be the ones
picking up the tab when that happens. As
a part of the changes the IOC has made
to hosting the Olympics, they've
increased the financial support they're
giving hosts to help reduce the
financial burden and risk. The IOC is
contributing nearly a billion dollars to
the Milan Cortina Olympics. Not a small
amount considering the stated budget of
the games is $1.6 billion. One of the
most cost-effective games in recent
history. This is again why the Milan
Cortina Games represents a shift in
hosting the games. It's incredibly cost
effective in part by using existing
venues throughout northern Italy and the
IOC is picking up the tab for nearly
half of the proposed budget. But the
budget for the games themselves is one
thing. What about the infrastructure
improvements that nearly always
accompany the games? Many host cities
bid based on promises of upgraded
airports, extended transit lines, and
new public spaces. How does this new era
of games affect this urban development?
And is this urban development a thing
that is actually helpful at all? Well,
as it turns out, for better or for
worse, cities and countries are still
pouring in a lot of money into
infrastructure. Italy will spend 3.4
billion euros in infrastructure upgrades
in the region, considerably more than
the cost of hosting the games
themselves. These projects also includes
housing for Olympians, many road
improvements in the Alps, and a rail
connection between Venice and the
airport. Venice is one of the closest
large cities to Cortina. Los Angeles is
already deep into its own infrastructure
projects for its 2028 summer Olympics.
LAX is getting $30 billion in upgrades
to terminals and transportation ahead of
the games. LA Metro is in the middle of
a 28x28 program to make 28 substantial
improvements to the transit system. LA
is known for its freeways, but the city
realizes that it needs to move both
visitors and locals with high-capacity
transit. I'm probably going to do a
whole video on that topic closer to
2028, so I'll leave it there. Planning
is often done on timelines that drag on
for decades. So, having a deadline can
have a positive effect on deploying
infrastructure upgrades like new transit
lines, though there are a few valid
critiques for moving quickly, though.
First, when you move fast, you can cut
corners on things like environmental
review and mitigation. There are reports
that this happened in Milan Cortina.
Second, an abbreviated timeline can mean
that the public doesn't get enough say
in the direction of these projects.
Third, the infrastructure might be more
geared for visitors and travelers than
residents. One study found that this
happened in Rio after the Olympics. Poor
residents barely benefited from all of
the upgrades. If a host city can avoid
these pitfalls, then there's nothing
wrong with using the games to build more
infrastructure. And that won't really
change with this new bidding system the
IOC set up. But what if the best
possible outcome for a city is to bid on
the Olympics, complete with an
infrastructure plan, not get awarded to
the games, but complete the plan anyway?
That's what Mitchell Moss at NYU's Ruden
Center for Transportation Policy and
Management argues. The IOC at the time
had strict requirements for bid cities
to show that they could actually deliver
all of the venues required of hosting
the games. Instead of working closely
with one strong option like the IOC does
today, it meant that there was a good
chance that the bid city would put in a
ton of planning work just to see their
bid rejected. New York knew this and
designed their bid to be helpful for the
city regardless of whether or not they
got the Olympics. I probably don't need
to tell you what happened. They did not
get chosen and London got those games.
But New York did things like build the
Olympic Village in Long Island City
anyway. The project called Hunter Point
South includes 5,000 new units in a
mixeduse development and 60% of those
units are permanently affordable
housing. The NYC Olympics plan also
called for a new stadium eventually
meant for the New York Jets on the west
side of Manhattan. This ended up not
even working out before the bid was in,
but the city had done so much prep work
on that site, a rail yard, that it
facilitated the construction of the
Hudson Yards development and an
expansion of the seven subway line. New
York's new stadium, City Field, and
Barclay Center were built anyway without
the Olympics. There are other small
remnants of the plan implemented
throughout the city, but you get the
idea. It's like New York hosted the
Olympics from an infrastructure point of
view without actually hosting the
Olympics. So, it is possible to actually
see infrastructure benefits without the
actual hosting part. The trick, of
course, is to find something to rally
the public to make these improvements.
New York still had the Olympic bid to
light a fire and get everyone on the
same page, to use a couple of cliches.
Ambitious planners will have to figure
out how to get the public to commit to
some kind of ambitious 10-year plan that
doesn't involve the Olympics. I also
have to mention that the New York plans
were not without controversy, and public
support for the bid wasn't particularly
high. People worried about
gentrification, thought maybe the money
spent at the Olympics could be spent on
projects and programs that would more
directly benefit New Yorkers. There's
also opposition from the billionaire who
owns Madison Square Garden, who didn't
want to see any sports related
competition in Manhattan, like a Hudson
Yards stadium. But public opinion of the
games has rarely factored into the IOC's
decision to award the Olympics
throughout history. Nor has it factored
into a city deciding to bid. But the New
York protests and other organized
opposition have changed that. Beijing
ended up hosting a winter Olympics in
2022 because residents in other bidding
cities, Oslo, Stockholm, Kkow, and
Munich expressed opposition to the bids.
So where do we stand? The IOC has
reformed the host bidding process to
allow entire regions to host. They made
it more affordable to host the games.
These are worthy goals. The Milan
Cortina Olympics are the first test of
this. Civic boosters and planners who
hope to get expedited infrastructure
improvements will still get those as
long as cities and countries continue to
fund them. The most recent and upcoming
Olympics suggest that they will and
people will still debate the impact the
Olympics have on cities even with
revised IOC guidelines for hosting.
I really love talking about the
intersection of sports and cities. And
if you made it this far in the video,
maybe that's you, too. So, I want to
throw a recommendation your way. It's
for a new series called Beyond the
Bleachers. This is a three-part look at
the differences between North American
and European stadiums, but it's not
looking at the stadium buildings
themselves, but also the location of
stadiums in their respective cities.
It's a really nice lens to be looking at
the differences between American and
European planning. I highly recommend
you check it out. It's available over on
Nebula. If you want more city planning
content, there's a ton of it over on
Nebula, all ad free. We're talking
channels like City Nerd, Not Just Bikes,
Downey Live, Steuart Hicks, Wendover
Productions, and other great cities and
transportation channels. On top of all
that, I also have exclusive urbanist
content on Nebula myself. My great city
series profiles some of the most iconic
parts of the world's most important
cities. I also produced Planning Ancient
Rome, a never-before-seen visual history
of the ancient city. It's some of my
best work because Nebula provided
additional resources, and it's only
available on that platform. You can get
all of this for a surprisingly
affordable price. And when you sign up
at my link, nebula.tv/ citybut, you'll
get 50% off an annual subscription. My
channel will even get a portion of that
subscription as long as you stay
subscribed. So, it's one of the best
ways to support me and this channel.
Nebula is also offering lifetime
memberships for people who want to go
above and beyond in their support of
this channel and the platform. They
normally cost $500, but right now we're
offering 40% off for those as well. So,
it's only 300 bucks for unlimited Nebula
for life. And if you want to help others
support City Beautiful, Nebula now
offers gift cards. You can gift someone
a month, a year, or a lifetime of
Nebula. I know these are popular gifts.
I've heard it from my subscribers. There
are so many ways to support this channel
by checking out Nebula. So, go give it a
try. Thanks.